content/blog/posts/esp-rust-15-07-2022.md, before:

+++
title="Rust on Espressif chips - 15-07-2022"
date=2022-07-11
draft=false
[taxonomies]
tags=["rust", "espressif", "esp32"]
+++

This is the next quarterly update of esp-rs effort, detailing the progress over Q2 2022.

## Standard library

[esp-rs/rust#117](https://github.com/esp-rs/rust/issues/117), failure to list file directories, has been fixed. This issue was actually two in one; the first was applicable to any filesystem, used through the `libc` API. The definition of the `dirent` structure was incorrect in `esp-idf`, [this `int` definition](https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf/blob/73be74fd71aeec03a972cfe0a9b2f19edc8ea3fa/components/newlib/platform_include/sys/dirent.h#L45) should have been a `ino_t` definition. The size difference between the two types meant that the name ended up with a null terminator at the beginning, hence no output would be printed when listing a directory. The second part was specific to SPIFFS (a flash based filesystem), listing a directory would emit an internal error number, which was interpreted as a real error, but in reality was just a signal the end of the listing. More details [here](https://github.com/pellepl/spiffs/pull/288).

## esp-hal & bare-metal support

[esp-hal](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal) has seen much development in the last quarter.

- Add a serial driver for the USB-SERIAL-JTAG peripheral - [esp-hal#56](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/pull/56)
- Add RMT output support - [esp-hal#53](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/pull/53)
- Use `fugit` time types in the HALs public API - [esp-hal#64](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/pull/64)
- Add support for the `SYSTIMER` on the `esp32c3`, `esp32s2` & `esp32s3` - [esp-hal#76](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/pull/76) 
- Add `ClockConfig` to start to support customizing the chip clocks - [esp-hal#77](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/pull/77)
- Add support for most `embedded-hal` alpha traits - [esp-hal#82](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/pull/82)
- Add basic EFUSE reading support - [esp-hal#85](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/pull/85)
- Add DAC peripheral support - [esp-hal#92](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/pull/92)
- Add support for using the second core on the `esp32` & `esp32s3` - [esp-hal#96](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/pull/96)

### Async support

On top of the PR's listed above, we have began working on `async` support too! The go-to embedded executor right now is [embassy](https://embassy.dev/), which only supported ARM until we recently added support for RISC-V in [embassy#804](https://github.com/embassy-rs/embassy/pull/804) & support for Xtensa in [embassy#805](https://github.com/embassy-rs/embassy/pull/805). The next step was to add a `embassy::time::Driver` implementation inside esp-hal after which we could create the most basic embassy demo, running on an esp32c3!

```rust
static EXECUTOR: Forever<Executor> = Forever::new();

#[riscv_rt::entry]
fn main() -> ! {
    let p = esp32c3_hal::embassy::init();

    let executor = EXECUTOR.put(Executor::new());
    executor.run(|spawner| {
        spawner.spawn(run1()).ok();
        spawner.spawn(run2()).ok();
    });

    loop {}
}

#[embassy::task]
async fn run1() {
    loop {
        esp_println::println!("Hello world from embassy on an esp32c3!");
        Timer::after(Duration::from_millis(1000)).await;
    }
}

#[embassy::task]
async fn run2() {
    loop {
        esp_println::println!("Bing!");
        Timer::after(Duration::from_millis(3000)).await;
    }
}
```
Which results in the following output: 
<script id="asciicast-500857" src="https://asciinema.org/a/500857.js" async></script>

Async support is not merged yet, but hopefully by next quarter we have something usable.


## Tooling

### espflash

In the last quarter we released version `1.5` of espflash which includes these changes:

- Release artifacts built for additional targets, installable via cargo-binstall
- Fixes a bug when passing multiple features, causing them to be improperly processed [esp-rs/espflash#162](https://github.com/esp-rs/espflash/pull/162)
- Update the --merge option of the save-image subcommand to behave in a more expected way [#160](https://github.com/esp-rs/espflash/pull/160)
- Fix a bug where the RTC watchdog timer was not disabled on reset when using USB Serial JTAG, resulting in flashing failures [esp-rs/espflash#169](https://github.com/esp-rs/espflash/pull/169)
- Add a partition-table subcommand which allows conversion between CSV/binary and viewing of partition tables on the command-line [esp-rs/espflash#172](https://github.com/esp-rs/espflash/pull/172)

### probe-rs

[@noppej](https://github.com/noppej) has been doing some fantastic work improve RISC-V support in probe-rs, [the first big PR](https://github.com/probe-rs/probe-rs/pull/1129) has already been merged, and [part two](https://github.com/probe-rs/probe-rs/pull/1147) is in review. These changes are huge, making debugging & producing usable stack traces viable on the RISC-V platform, which is handy for the `esp32c`-series which are all RISC-V based. I hope by the end of the year we would have some basic support for Xtensa too, but that's quite an effort to complete.

### wokwi-server

[`wokwi`](https://wokwi.com/) is an online simulator for IoT projects, it supports many chips including most Espressif ones, the `esp32`, `esp32s2` & `esp32c3`. By default, Wokwi provides an Arduino like IDE in the browser which handles compilation, and then runs the program in the simulator. What's really cool is that Wokwi also exposes a GDB stub which can be used to debug applications, a task which can be very tricky to setup on real hardware.

Rust support (compilation in the browser) is on-going but not ready for general use just yet, however there is another way to use Wokwi for Rust development. Introducing [`wokwi-server`](https://github.com/MabezDev/wokwi-server), a way to build an application locally then run it in the browser - no hardware required! See the [cargo runner section](https://github.com/MabezDev/wokwi-server#as-a-cargo-runner) of the README for details. Once setup, `cargo run` is all you need.

## esp rust board

The [esp rust board](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-rust-board) is now available for purchase! You can find purchase links on [the Espressif website](https://www.espressif.com/en/products/devkits), it is listed as `ESP32-C3-DevKit-RUST-1`.

## Ferrous systems training

Tickets to [the Ferrous training](https://ferrous-systems.com/blog/announce-esp-training/) based on the `esp32c3` are now available too, checkout the options [here](https://ferrous-systems.com/training/#package-espressif-beginner-training). Booking the training includes a `ESP32-C3-DevKit-RUST-1 board` as part of the package.

## What's next?

Continue the rapid progress on the bare metal multi-chip HAL, `esp-hal`, including the new `async` effort. `esp-idf` version 5.0 is nearly here, and has some breaking changes that we'll need to handle in `libc` andq our `esp-idf` crates.


<br/>

---

<br/>

Commit message:

Add WiFI & esp-backtrace tooling

content/blog/posts/esp-rust-15-07-2022.md, after:

+++
title="Rust on Espressif chips - 15-07-2022"
date=2022-07-11
draft=false
[taxonomies]
tags=["rust", "espressif", "esp32"]
+++

This is the next quarterly update of esp-rs effort, detailing the progress over Q2 2022.

## Standard library

[esp-rs/rust#117](https://github.com/esp-rs/rust/issues/117), failure to list file directories, has been fixed. This issue was actually two in one; the first was applicable to any filesystem, used through the `libc` API. The definition of the `dirent` structure was incorrect in `esp-idf`, [this `int` definition](https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf/blob/73be74fd71aeec03a972cfe0a9b2f19edc8ea3fa/components/newlib/platform_include/sys/dirent.h#L45) should have been a `ino_t` definition. The size difference between the two types meant that the name ended up with a null terminator at the beginning, hence no output would be printed when listing a directory. The second part was specific to SPIFFS (a flash based filesystem), listing a directory would emit an internal error number, which was interpreted as a real error, but in reality was just a signal the end of the listing. More details [here](https://github.com/pellepl/spiffs/pull/288).

## esp-hal & bare-metal support

[esp-hal](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal) has seen much development in the last quarter.

- Add a serial driver for the USB-SERIAL-JTAG peripheral - [esp-hal#56](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/pull/56)
- Add RMT output support - [esp-hal#53](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/pull/53)
- Use `fugit` time types in the HALs public API - [esp-hal#64](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/pull/64)
- Add support for the `SYSTIMER` on the `esp32c3`, `esp32s2` & `esp32s3` - [esp-hal#76](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/pull/76) 
- Add `ClockConfig` to start to support customizing the chip clocks - [esp-hal#77](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/pull/77)
- Add support for most `embedded-hal` alpha traits - [esp-hal#82](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/pull/82)
- Add basic EFUSE reading support - [esp-hal#85](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/pull/85)
- Add DAC peripheral support - [esp-hal#92](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/pull/92)
- Add support for using the second core on the `esp32` & `esp32s3` - [esp-hal#96](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/pull/96)

### WiFi & Bluetooth

[esp-wifi](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-wifi) has been moved to the esp-rs organization, as well as support for WiFi on the Xtensa based `esp32` which was implemented in [esp-rs/esp-wifi#4](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-wifi/pull/4). The radios inside the `esp32` & `esp32c3` also support Bluetooth Low Energy, which has now been implemented for the `esp32c3` in [esp-rs/esp-wifi#30](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-wifi/pull/30) & the `esp32` in [esp-rs/esp-wifi#34](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-wifi/pull/34). esp-wifi is still experimental, so do expect issues but its in a good enough state that [bjoernQ](https://github.com/bjoernQ) rewrote [his temperature logging project](https://github.com/bjoernQ/esp32-rust-nostd-temperature-logger) using bare metal!

### Async support

On top of the PR's listed above, we have began working on `async` support too! The go-to embedded executor right now is [embassy](https://embassy.dev/), which only supported ARM until we recently added support for RISC-V in [embassy#804](https://github.com/embassy-rs/embassy/pull/804) & support for Xtensa in [embassy#805](https://github.com/embassy-rs/embassy/pull/805). The next step was to add a `embassy::time::Driver` implementation inside esp-hal after which we could create the most basic embassy demo, running on an esp32c3!

```rust
static EXECUTOR: Forever<Executor> = Forever::new();

#[riscv_rt::entry]
fn main() -> ! {
    let p = esp32c3_hal::embassy::init();

    let executor = EXECUTOR.put(Executor::new());
    executor.run(|spawner| {
        spawner.spawn(run1()).ok();
        spawner.spawn(run2()).ok();
    });

    loop {}
}

#[embassy::task]
async fn run1() {
    loop {
        esp_println::println!("Hello world from embassy on an esp32c3!");
        Timer::after(Duration::from_millis(1000)).await;
    }
}

#[embassy::task]
async fn run2() {
    loop {
        esp_println::println!("Bing!");
        Timer::after(Duration::from_millis(3000)).await;
    }
}
```
Which results in the following output: 
<script id="asciicast-500857" src="https://asciinema.org/a/500857.js" async></script>

Async support is not merged yet, but hopefully by next quarter we have something usable.


## Tooling

### espflash

In the last quarter we released version `1.5` of espflash which includes these changes:

- Release artifacts built for additional targets, installable via cargo-binstall
- Fixes a bug when passing multiple features, causing them to be improperly processed [esp-rs/espflash#162](https://github.com/esp-rs/espflash/pull/162)
- Update the --merge option of the save-image subcommand to behave in a more expected way [#160](https://github.com/esp-rs/espflash/pull/160)
- Fix a bug where the RTC watchdog timer was not disabled on reset when using USB Serial JTAG, resulting in flashing failures [esp-rs/espflash#169](https://github.com/esp-rs/espflash/pull/169)
- Add a partition-table subcommand which allows conversion between CSV/binary and viewing of partition tables on the command-line [esp-rs/espflash#172](https://github.com/esp-rs/espflash/pull/172)

### probe-rs

[@noppej](https://github.com/noppej) has been doing some fantastic work improve RISC-V support in probe-rs, [the first big PR](https://github.com/probe-rs/probe-rs/pull/1129) has already been merged, and [part two](https://github.com/probe-rs/probe-rs/pull/1147) is in review. These changes are huge, making debugging & producing usable stack traces viable on the RISC-V platform, which is handy for the `esp32c`-series which are all RISC-V based. I hope by the end of the year we would have some basic support for Xtensa too, but that's quite an effort to complete.

### wokwi-server

[`wokwi`](https://wokwi.com/) is an online simulator for IoT projects, it supports many chips including most Espressif ones, the `esp32`, `esp32s2` & `esp32c3`. By default, Wokwi provides an Arduino like IDE in the browser which handles compilation, and then runs the program in the simulator. What's really cool is that Wokwi also exposes a GDB stub which can be used to debug applications, a task which can be very tricky to setup on real hardware.

Rust support (compilation in the browser) is on-going but not ready for general use just yet, however there is another way to use Wokwi for Rust development. Introducing [`wokwi-server`](https://github.com/MabezDev/wokwi-server), a way to build an application locally then run it in the browser - no hardware required! See the [cargo runner section](https://github.com/MabezDev/wokwi-server#as-a-cargo-runner) of the README for details. Once setup, `cargo run` is all you need.

## esp-backtrace & esp-println

[esp-println](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-println) prvoides `print!` & `println!` macros for all Espressif chips currently supported, as well as a `log::Log` implementation too. It is a standalone crate with no dependencies (uses the ROM functions burned into the chip at the factory). [esp-backtrace](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-backtrace) is a crate for generating backtraces _on the chip_, and supports all the printing methods esp-println does. We currently have support for generating Xtensa & RISC-V backtraces which covers all Espressif chips.

## esp rust board

The [esp rust board](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-rust-board) is now available for purchase! You can find purchase links on [the Espressif website](https://www.espressif.com/en/products/devkits), it is listed as `ESP32-C3-DevKit-RUST-1`.

## Ferrous systems training

Tickets to [the Ferrous training](https://ferrous-systems.com/blog/announce-esp-training/) based on the `esp32c3` are now available too, checkout the options [here](https://ferrous-systems.com/training/#package-espressif-beginner-training). Booking the training includes a `ESP32-C3-DevKit-RUST-1 board` as part of the package.

## What's next?

Continue the rapid progress on the bare metal multi-chip HAL, `esp-hal`, including the new `async` effort. `esp-idf` version 5.0 is nearly here, and has some breaking changes that we'll need to handle in `libc` andq our `esp-idf` crates.


<br/>

---

<br/>
