+++
title="Rust on Espressif chips - 24-01-2024"
date=2024-01-24
draft=false
[taxonomies]
tags=["rust", "espressif", "esp32", "llvm"]
+++

This is the next quarterly update of the esp-rs effort, detailing the progress over Q4 2023.

## Rust Compiler

### Upstream

### Xtensa

## esp-hal - no_std

Q4 saw the `v0.13`, `v0.14` and `v0.15` release of esp-hal. Highlights include new async drivers for PARL_IO, I2S, RMT; along with updating to the long-awaited `v1.0` of embedded-hal! We expanded on our low-power support by unifying the API across all chips, as well as adding ULP (Ultra-Low-Powered) core support for the ESP32S2 & ESP32S3. Lastly, one cool feature we implemented was `flip-link` for the ESP32C6 and ESP32H2, `flip-link` gives zero-cost stack overflow detection, which is really nice on a chip that doesn't have an MMU. Check out the full [changelog](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md) for all the details and changes.

One important breaking change that should be noted is that we no longer support atomic emulation, as upstream Rust now supports atomic load & stores on non-atomic targets. Users with applications using the ESP32S2, ESP32C3 or ESP32C2, please read [this](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-hal/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md#breaking-1) to ease upgrading.

## esp-wifi - no_std

In Q4 we added support for BLE with the ESP32H2, fixed coexistence support on the ESP32 and added a benchmark example to test WiFi throughput. On top of that, we finally released `esp-wifi` on crates.io! We spent a long time refining and documenting to get to this point and we're pleased to have it published. 

## Tooling

### espflash

Q4 saw the release of `v2.1.0` of espflash, a small release with some new functionality for erasing sectors, regions and partitions. We then began the `v3.0` development cycle, which will include [the Rust-based flashing stubs](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-flasher-stub) by default! Checkout the unreleased section of the [changelog](https://github.com/esp-rs/espflash/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md#added) to see what's been added so far.

### probe-rs

There has been a tonne of progress with probe-rs and Espressif chips over Q4. This is all driven by the fact we want to start testing using real hardware in CI, known as Hardware In Loop (HIL) testing.

Newer Espressif chips are all RISC-V based, which probe-rs already has good support for. The ESP32, ESP32S2 and ESP32S3, however, are Xtensa-based, there for to test these in CI, we need [Xtensa architecture support in probe-rs](https://github.com/probe-rs/probe-rs/issues/2001) and that's what we set out to do. I am happy to report that we have enough Xtensa support in probe-rs to, connect, inspect and flash the ESP32S2 and ESP32S3! This also comes with some huge speed improvements to _all_ chips thanks to improvements in the USB-SERIAL-JTAG and FTDI drivers in probe-rs. All of this would not be possible without the hard work of the probe-rs team and of course one particular individual, [Dániel Buga](https://github.com/bugadani) who has been championing this work. 

## RFCs

This section is mainly for users of esp-rs; we have various issues open in which we would like user feedback.

### esp-hal 





<br/>

---

<br/>
